README
======

GoogleAuth is a Java server library that implements the _Time-based One-time
Password_ (TOTP) algorithm specified in [RFC 6238][RFC6238].

This implementation borrows from [Google Authenticator][gauth], whose C code has
served as a reference, and was created upon code published in
[this blog post][tgb] by Enrico M. Crisostomo.

Storing User Credentials
------------------------

The library does *not* store nor load user credentials directly, and a hook is
provided to users who want to integrate this functionality.
The *ICredentialRepository* interface defines the contract between a credential
repository and this library and a custom implementation can be plugged in and
used by the library as a user-provided credential repository.

The following methods take a user name as a parameter and require a credential
repository to be available:

  * `String getSecretKey(String userName)`.
  * `void saveUserCredentials(String userName, ...)`.

The credentials repository establishes the relationship between a user _name_
and its credentials.  This way, API methods receiving only a user name instead
of credentials can be used:

  * `public GoogleAuthenticatorKey createCredentials(String userName)`.
  * `boolean authorizeUser(String userName, ...)`.

If an attempt is made to use such methods when no credential repository is
configured, a meaningful error is emitted:

    java.lang.UnsupportedOperationException: An instance of the
    com.warrenstrange.googleauth.ICredentialRepository service must be
    configured in order to use this feature.

Registering a Credential Repository
-----------------------------------

The library looks for instances of this interface using the
[Java ServiceLoader API][serviceLoader] (introduced in Java 6), that is,
scanning the `META-INF/services` package looking for a file named
`com.warrenstrange.googleauth.ICredentialRepository` and, if found, loading the
provider classes listed therein.

Compile-Time Requirements
-------------------------

To successfully compile this library a Java SE 7 compiler is required and
sources must be compiled at least at language level 7.0.

Dependencies
-------------------------

This library depends on the following libraries:

  * Apache Commons Codec.
  * JAX-RS v. 2.x (provided scope).
  * JAX-RS v. 2.x implementation (provided scope).
  * JUnit (test scope).

Since this library is a Maven project, always refer to `pom.xml` for up-to-date
dependencies and further details.

Client Applications
-------------------

Both the Google Authenticator client applications (available for iOS, Android
and BlackBerry) and its PAM module can be used to generate codes to be validated
by this library.

However, this library can also be used to build custom client applications if
Google Authenticator is not available on your platform or if it cannot be used.

Library Documentation
---------------------

This library includes full JavaDoc documentation and a JUnit test suite that can
be used as example code for most of the library purposes.

Texinfo documentation sources are also included and a PDF manual can be
generated by an Autotools-generated `Makefile`:

  * To bootstrap the Autotools, the included `autogen.sh` script can be used.
  
  * Configure and build the documentation:

        $ ./configure
        $ make pdf

Since typical users will not have a TeX distribution installed in their
computers, the PDF manuals for every version of fswatch will be hosted at
[this address][pdfdoc].

[pdfdoc]: https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0BxZtP9CHH-Q6TzRSaWtkQ0pEYk0&usp=sharing

Usage
-----

The following code creates a new set of credentials for a user. No user name is
provided to the API and it's responsibility of the caller to save them for later
use during the authorisation phase.

    GoogleAuthenticator gAuth = new GoogleAuthenticator();
    final GoogleAuthenticatorKey key = gAuth.createCredentials();

The following code creates a new set of credentials for the user `caller` and
stores them on the configured `ICredentialRepository` instance:

    GoogleAuthenticator gAuth = new GoogleAuthenticator();
    final GoogleAuthenticatorKey key = gAuth.createCredentials("caller");

If a credential repository is not configured the code will *fail* throwing an
`UnsupportedOperationException`.

The following code checks the validity of the specified `code` against the
provided Base32-encoded `secretKey`:

    GoogleAuthenticator gAuth = new GoogleAuthenticator();
    boolean isCodeValid = gAuth.authorize(secretKey, code);

The following code checks the validity of the specified `code` against the
secret key of the user `caller` returned by the configured
`ICredentialRepository` instance:

    GoogleAuthenticator gAuth = new GoogleAuthenticator();
    boolean isCodeValid = ga.authorizeUser("caller", code);

Bug Reports
-----------

Bug reports can be sent directly to the authors.

[RFC6238]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6238
[gauth]: https://code.google.com/p/google-authenticator/
[tgb]: http://thegreyblog.blogspot.com/2011/12/google-authenticator-using-it-in-your.html?q=google+authenticator
[serviceLoader]: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html
[SecureRandom]: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/security/SecureRandom.html
[sr-algorithms]: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/security/StandardNames.html#SecureRandom
